https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IEC_62056#IEC_62056-21

IEC 61107 or currently IEC 62056-21, was an international standard for a
computer protocol to read utility meters. It is designed to operate over any
media, including the Internet. A meter sends ASCII (in modes A..D) or HDLC
(mode E) data to a nearby hand-held unit (HHU) using a serial port.
The physical media are usually either modulated light, sent with an LED and
received with a photodiode, or a pair of wires, usually modulated by a 20mA
current loop. The protocol is usually half-duplex.

The following exchange usually takes a second or two, and occurs when a person
from the utility company presses a meter-reading gun against a transparent
faceplate on the meter, or plugs into the metering bus at the mailbox of an
apartment building.

The general protocol consists of a "sign on" sequence, in which a handheld unit
identifies itself to the metering unit. During sign-on, the handheld unit
addresses a particular meter by number. The meter and hand-held unit negotiate
various parameters such as the maximum frame length during transmission and
reception, whether multiple frames can be sent without acknowledging individual
frames (Windowing), the fastest communication rate that they can both manage
(only in case of mode E switching to HDLC) etc. Next the meter informs the hand
held unit about the various parameters that are available with it in various
security settings viz. the 'no security logical group', ' the low security
logical groups' and ' the high security logical groups'.

If the parameter required is in no security group, just a get.request will
provide the HHU with the desired response. If the parameter required is in low
security group, a password authentication of the HHU is required before
information can be read.

In case of high security parameters,the meter challenges the hand held unit
with a cryptographic password. The hand held unit must return an encrypted
password. If the password exchange is ok, the meter accepts the hand held unit-
it is "signed on."

After signing on, the hand held unit generally reads a meter description.
This describes some registers that describe the current count of metered units
(i.e. kilowatt hours, megajoules, litres of gas or water) and the metering
unit's reliability (is it still operating ok?). Occasionally a manufacturer
will invent a new quantity to measure, and in this case, a new or different
data type will appear in the meter definition. Most metering units have special
modes for calibration and resetting meter registers. These modes are usually
protected by anti-tampering features such as switches that sense if the meter
enclosure has been opened.

The HHU may also be given limited rights to set or reset certain parameters in
the meter.

The hand held unit then sends a sign-off message, and the meter automatically
signs off after a previously negotiated time interval after the last message,
if no sign-off message is sent.
